.. _dev_apps:

SODAR App Development
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This document provides information and resources on accessing and developing
different apps used in the SODAR server. Some of these originate in the
`SODAR Core framework <https://github.com/bihealth/sodar-core>`_, while others
are apps native to the
`SODAR server <https://github.com/bihealth/sodar-server>`_ repository.


SODAR Core Apps
===============

SODAR uses the following apps from SODAR Core:

- `projectroles <https://sodar-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/app_projectroles.html>`_
- `adminalerts <https://sodar-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/app_adminalerts.html>`_
- `appalerts <https://sodar-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/app_appalerts.html>`_
- `siteinfo <https://sodar-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/app_siteinfo.html>`_
- `sodarcache <https://sodar-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/app_sodarcache.html>`_
- `timeline <https://sodar-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/app_timeline.html>`_
- `tokens <https://sodar-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/app_tokens.html>`_
- `userprofile <https://sodar-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/app_userprofile.html>`_

For details on each app as well as the APIs potentially offered, see their
respective documentation as linked above. Note that issues and changes to these
apps need to be raised and implemented in the separate
`SODAR Core repository <https://github.com/bihealth/sodar-core>`_ and introduced
to SODAR via the ``django-sodar-core`` dependency.


General App Development Guidelines
==================================

This documentation assumes you are familiar in the way Django apps are set up.
General conventions apply unless otherwise noted.

SODAR apps define *plugins*. In addition to the typical Django app setup, apps
with plugins need to be registered into the database before they can be run on
your development site. This can be done with the following command:

.. code-block:: console

    $ ./manage.py syncplugins

The command is also run automatically together with ``./manage.py migrate``.


Samplesheets
============

In addition to the typical SODAR Core based Django app, the ``samplesheets`` app
consists of multiple subsystems. This section is split into multiple subsections
detailing each subsystem.

Django App
----------

In addition to the standard SODAR Core app components, the ``samplesheets``
Django app contains the following modules:

constants
    Application constants are stored here.
io
    Sample sheet importing and exporting between ISA-Tab TSV files and a Django
    database model. Uses the `altamISA <https://github.com/bihealth/altamisa>`_
    parser.
rendering
    Sample sheet rendering from the graph-based Django database model into
    tables, for UI rendering and mapping iRODS collections to table rows.
sheet_config
    Management of sample sheet editing and display configurations.
tasks_celery
    Celery tasks for asynchronous actions.

The Django app provides the standard framework for views and backend
functionality. The app also provides the Ajax API views required for the Vue.js
app to retrieve data from the server side.

Except for the sample sheet viewer and editor implemented as a Vue.js app, it is
recommended to develop views in the app as server-side Django views.

Vue.js App
----------

The Vue.js app is located under ``samplesheets/vueapp``. It is used as the
sample sheet viewer and editor. The app is embedded into the Django app view
``ProjectSheetsView`` and the associated ``project_sheets.html`` template using
`django-webpack-loader <https://github.com/django-webpack/django-webpack-loader>`_.

The app uses `ag-grid <https://www.ag-grid.com/vue-data-grid/vue2/>`_ for table
rendering and interactivity. It is recommended to get familiarized with ag-grid
before developing this app.

The app is set up with strict linting, which should make following code
conventions straightfoward.

At the moment, the app is implemented on Vue v2. Upgrading to Vue v3 will be
considered in the future.

Study Sub-Apps
--------------

Study sub-apps are stored under ``samplesheets/studyapps``. They are used to
dynamically introduce study table shortcuts for specific sample sheet
configurations.

The following study sub-apps currently exist:

cancer
    Study sub-app for cancer studies. Organizes shortcuts by case.
germline
    Study sub-app for germline studies. Organizes shortcuts by pedigree.

These apps generally consist of a plugin implementing certain methods, but can
also include e.g. views to be linked from the UI elements generated by the
plugin.

To create a new study sub-app, you should first start a Django app under
``samplesheets/studyapps``. In ``plugins.py``, you need to implement a plugin
based on ``samplesheets.plugins.SampleSheetStudyPluginPoint``.

Member variables:

``name``
    ID of the sub-app plugin. It is recommended to prefix this with
    ``samplesheets_study_*``, so your plugin's name should be in the form of
    ``samplesheets_study_yourapp``.
``title``
    Display title for your sub-app. Used in the UI.
``config_name``
    Sample sheet configuration name. Must correspond to the expected name used
    in the ISA-Tab investigation file comment labeled
    ``Created with Configuration``.
``description``
    Verbose description for the sub-app.
``permission``
    Required permission to view data with this app (optional).

Methods:

``get_shortcut_column()``
    Return a dictionary containing shortcuts for an extra study table links
    column in a sample sheet study table. These shortcuts can either be direct
    links or open a modal with parameters for retrieving data into the modal.
``get_shortcut_links()``
    Return links for a shortcut modal opened by the links column.
``update_cache()``
    Update the ``sodarcache`` entry for the app related to a specific cache item
    or project, or for all projects.

An example of expected output for ``get_shortcut_column()``:

.. code-block:: python

    {
        'schema': {
            'your_link': {
                'type': 'link',
                'icon': 'mdi:info',
                'title': 'Printable title for link',
            }
            'your_modal': {
                'type': 'modal',
                'icon': 'mdi:info',
                'title': 'Printable title for modal opening',
            }
        },
        'data': [  # Data for the entire table, array item per table row
            'your_link': {
                'url': some_url,
                'enabled': True,
            },
            'your_modal': {
                'query': {
                    'key': some_parameter,
                    'value': some_value_like_source_id,
                },
                'enabled': True
            }
        ]
    }

An example of expected output for ``get_shortcut_links()``:

.. code-block:: python

    {
        'title': 'Title for shortcut modal',
        'data': {
            'item': {
                'title': 'Printable title for item type',
                'files': [
                    {
                        'label': 'Link label (e.g. related extract name)',
                        'url': some_url,
                        'title': 'Mouseover title'
                        'extra_links': {  # Additional links for the same item
                            'label': 'Mouseover label',
                            'icon': 'mdi:info',  # Icon for link button
                            'url': some_extra_url
                        }
                    }
                ]
            }
        }
    }

The use of each study sub-app in sample sheets should be documented to the user
in :ref:`metadata_advanced`.

Assay Sub-Apps
--------------

Similar to study sub-apps, assay sub-apps provide a dynamic way to link content
within assays based on the assay type. They are placed under
``samplesheets/assayapps``.

The following assay sub-apps currently exist:

dna_sequencing
    DNA sequencing assay app.
generic_raw
    Generic assay app providing a top level "raw data" collection under each
    assay.
meta_ms
    Metabolite profiling / mass spectrometry assay app.
microarray
    Microarray assay app.
pep_ms
    Protein expression profiling / mass spectrometry assay app.

These apps consist of a plugin implementing certain methods. To create a new
assay sub-app, you should first start a Django app under
``samplesheets/assayapps``. In ``plugins.py``, you need to implement a plugin
based on ``samplesheets.plugins.SampleSheetAssayPluginPoint``.

Member variables:

``name``
    ID of the sub-app plugin. It is recommended to prefix this with
    ``samplesheets_assay_*``, so your plugin's name should be in the form of
    ``samplesheets_assay_yourapp``.
``title``
    Display title for your sub-app. Used in the UI.
``app_name``
    App name for dynamic reference to app in e.g. caching. Should be defined
    in the module.
``assay_fields``
    Identifying assay fields. These link the sub-app to a specific assay. It is
    given as a list of dicts each containing two keys, ``measurement_type`` and
    ``technology_type``. These are checked against the corresponding paramters
    in the ``Assay`` model and the first successful hit returns true.
``description``
    Verbose description for the sub-app.
``permission``
    Required permission to view data with this app (optional).
``display_row_links``
    Toggle displaying row-based iRODS links in the assay table, if relevant to
    this assay type.

Methods:

``get_row_path()``
    Return iRODS path for a specific assay table row.
``update_row()``
    Update table row with e.g. links.
``get_shortcuts()``
    Return assay level iRODS shortcuts.
``update_cache()``
    Update the ``sodarcache`` entry for the app related to a specific cache item
    or project, or for all projects.

The use of each assay sub-app in sample sheets should be documented to the user
in :ref:`metadata_advanced`.


Landingzones
============

The ``landingzones`` app is used to manage landing zones in iRODS related to the
project sample sheets.

Because this app relies heavily on data created by the ``samplesheets`` app,
hard-coded imports from samplesheets are allowed as opposed to usual SODAR Core
conventions.

Configuration Sub-Apps
----------------------

It is possible to define specific configuration sub-apps for special cases of
landing zones where extra functionality is required. These are implemented in a
style similar to the study and assay sub-apps in samplesheets.

To create a new configuration sub-app, you should first start a Django app under
``landingzones/configapps``. In ``plugins.py``, you need to implement a plugin
based on ``landingzones.plugins.LandingZoneConfigPluginPoint``.

Member variables:

``name``
    ID of the sub-app plugin. It is recommended to prefix this with
    ``landingzones_config_*``, so your plugin's name should be in the form of
    ``landingzones_config_yourapp``.
``title``
    Display title for your sub-app. Used in the UI.
``config_name``
    Configuration name. Used to identify plugin by configuration string.
``config_display_name``
    Configuration name to be displayed in the UI.
``description``
    Verbose description for the sub-app.
``menu_items``
    Additional items for the landing zone dropdown menu.
``api_config_data``
    Fields from ``LandingZone.config_data`` to be displayed in zone list API.
``permission``
    Required permission to view data with this app (optional).

Methods:

``cleanup_zone()``
    Perform custom actions before landing zone deletion (optional).
``get_extra_flow_data()``
    Return custom parameters for taskflowbackend (optional).


Irodsadmin
==========

The ``irodsadmin`` app provides helper management commands for iRODS data. At
this moment, it contains the ``irodsorphans`` command. It will search for
orphaned iRODS collections in both project sample data repositories and landing
zones. It returns a list of collections not tied into any project as recognized
by SODAR.


Irodsbackend
============

The ``irodsbackend`` app provides an API for iRODS connections and common iRODS
helpers. If enabled, it can be included in your application as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    from projectroles.plugins import get_backend_api
    irods_backend = get_backend_api('omics_irods')

The API retrieves iRODS connection parameters from the Django configuration. It
uses an admin account to perform actions on the iRODS server. The
``IRODS_ENV_BACKEND`` setting can be used to override environment values for
these backend connections.

To create and access the iRODS session, it is recommended to do it using the
backend API using ``get_session()`` via a context manager:

.. code-block:: python

    with irods_backend.get_session() as irods:
        pass  # Your session code here

Alternatively, you can get the object directly with ``get_session_obj()``. This
requires you to call ``cleanup()`` manually and it is mostly recommended for
testing.

.. code-block:: python

    irods = irods_backend.get_session_obj()
    pass  # Your session code here
    irods.cleanup()


Irodsinfo
=========

The ``irodsinfo`` app simply displays iRODS server information and is used to
generate a client configuration for the user.


Ontologyaccess
==============

The ``ontologyaccess`` app is used for parsing ``.obo`` and ``.owl`` format
ontologies, which are then queried by the ``samplesheets`` app in its UI. The
app provides both a site app and a backend app plugin for managing local
ontologies and providing an API for ontology list, respectively. Ajax API views
for ontology queries are also provided.

Import operations can be found in the ``io`` module. Note that for parsing the
OMIM catalog is done using a separate ``import_omim()`` method to convert it
into a dummy OBO-compatible format.


Taskflowbackend
===============

This backend application handles project data specific transactions in the iRODS
data management system, with rollback capability on errors. It is based on the
formerly separate SODAR Taskflow repository. The Taskflow backend is invoked as
follows:

.. code-block:: python

    taskflow = get_backend_api('taskflowbackend')

Jobs are submitted using the ``submit()`` method similar to the following
example:

.. code-block:: python

    taskflow.submit(
        project=project,
        flow_name='sheet_colls_create',
        flow_data=flow_data,
    )

Taskflowbackend uses the project modify API introduced in SODAR Core v0.11 to
set up project data in iRODS according to project and role assignment changes.

The ``syncmodifyapi`` management command can be used to sync all projects into
iRODS. This should only be used in development when there is need to e.g.
recreate a local iRODS database.
